Manual/merging (#580)
tweag/nickel: doc/manual/merging.md

# Merging records

When you have a big configuration, the way to split it in several files
(e.g.: separated by cathegorie or level of abstraction) is the merging operator.

> In nickel this is the `&` operator.

Reviewer: We'll have to change this paragraph, it's a little awkward. And probably doesn't hammer strongly enough why the reader should read on.

> For instence, having a server config and a firewall config, the network config

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance, having a server config and a firewall config, the network config
```

could be:

```text
let
server = import "server.ncl",
firewall = import "firewall.ncl",
in
server & firewall
```

> In the simple case where both records do not have common fields, it gives a
> record which is the union of both.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In the simple case where records `x` and `y` have no common fields, `x&y` is the union of `x` and `y`.
```

In addition, give an example.

If you have to merge records with fields in commons, you will use two new concepts:

- default annotation,

> - overwriting,

Reviewer: Are these two concepts or just one?

There are other merging cases:
- merging two record fields.
- merging a field against a field which merely has a contract attached (this emulate mix-ins in particular).

## Default annotation

To be able to merge records with commons fields, at least one side field has to

> be annotated as default. This means, if you have two records:

Reviewer: As I was saying, this isn't the case.

```text
let left = {
  firewall.enabled = true,
  firewall.type = "iptables",
  firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443],
} in
let right = {
  firewall.enabled = false,
  server.host.options = "TLS",
} in
left & right
```

> Like it is, it's impossible to merge and will throw an unmergeable terms error.

Reviewer: Explain why.

Here, the issue is on the field `firewall.enabled`. What you have to do to fix it
is to annotate this field as default in one of the records:

```text
let left = {
  firewall.enabled | default = true,
  firewall.type = "iptables",
  firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443],
} in
let right = {
  firewall.enabled = false,
  server.host.options = "TLS",
} in
left & right
// => {firewall.enabled = false, ...}
```

The default annotation is generaly to give a default value to a record field.
So, this value can be changed afterward. Saying it in a more abstract way,
default indicate a lower priority to a field in case of merging. Saying that,
If both sides have been annotated `default`, the merge is not possible.

## Overwriting

The overwriting is the concept specifying the behaviour of a merge when you
overwrite a field on which depends an other one. This  feature is described in

> ["#573 [RFC] Merge types and terms syntax proposal"](https://github.com/tweag/nickel/pull/573)

Reviewer: Don't link to pull requests in the documentation. Don't link to merged RFCs either (they are internal documentation).

Well, let me temper that. You can link to them as further reading for the curious reader (links are good!). But they can't be the introduction, and the understanding of the documentation can't depend on reading them.

You are allowed to copy large bits of them though!

in more details.

Here, we will simply explain what appen in the following case:
We have a record with some fields annotated `default` and others depending on
these ones. An example could be:

```text
let security = {
    firewall.open_proto.http | default = true,
    firewall.open_proto.https | default = true,
    firewall.open_proto.ftp | default = true,
    firewall.open_ports = []
        @ (if firewall.open_proto.ftp then [21] else [])
	@ (if firewall.open_proto.http then [80] else [])
	@ (if firewall.open_proto.https then [443] else []),
} in // security => {firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443]
security & {firewall.open_proto.ftp = false} // => {firewall.open_ports = [80, 443]
```

We then see that dependent fields are updated when you overwrite the fields they
depend on.

## A word about contracts

> To simplify, when merging two records, all contracts of both left and right one

Reviewer: Why do you want to “simplify”?

are applied to the resulting one.

> For instence:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For instance:
```

# Merging records

When you have a big configuration, the way to split it in several files
(e.g.: separated by cathegorie or level of abstraction) is the merging operator.
In nickel this is the `&` operator.

For instence, having a server config and a firewall config, the network config
could be:

```text
let
server = import "server.ncl",
firewall = import "firewall.ncl",
in
server & firewall
```

In the simple case where both record does not have common fields, it give a

> record which is the union of both ones.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
record which is the union of both.
```

Reviewer 2: Could also be "record which is the union of both records".

> If you have to merge with fields in commons, you will use two new concepts:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If you have to merge records with fields in commons, you will use two new concepts:
```

- default annotation,
- overwriting,

## Default annotation

To be able to merge records with commons fields, at least one side field has to

> be annotated as default. It means, if you have two records:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
be annotated as default. This means, if you have two records:
```

```text
let left = {
  firewall.enabled = true,
  firewall.type = "iptables",
  firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443],
} in
let right = {
  firewall.enabled = false,
  server.host.options = "TLS",
} in
left & right
```

Like it is, it's impossible to merge and will throw an unmergeable terms error.
Here, the issue is on the field `firewall.enabled`. What you have to do to fix it
is to annotate this field as default in one of the records:

```text
let left = {
  firewall.enabled | default = true,
  firewall.type = "iptables",
  firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443],
} in
let right = {
  firewall.enabled = false,
  server.host.options = "TLS",
} in
left & right
// => {firewall.enabled = false, ...}
```

The default annotation is generaly to give a default value to a record field.
So, this value can be changed afterward. Saying it in a more abstract way,

> default indicate a smaller priority to a field in case of merging. Saying that,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
default indicate a lower priority to a field in case of merging. Saying that,
```

> If both side would have been annotated `default`, the merge is not possible

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If both sides have been annotated `default`, the merge is not possible.
```

> neither.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
```

## Overwriting

The overwriting is the concept specifying the behaviour of a merge when you

> overwrite a field on which depend an otherone. This  feature is described in

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
overwrite a field on which depends an other one. This  feature is described in
```

["#573 [RFC] Merge types and terms syntax proposal"](https://github.com/tweag/nickel/pull/573)
in more details.

> Here, we will simply explain what appen in the following case:

Reviewer 2: This sentence should be reworded.

We have a record with some fields annotated `default` and others depending on

> these ones. An exemple could be:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
these ones. An example could be:
```

```text
let security = {
    firewall.open_proto.http | default = true,
    firewall.open_proto.https | default = true,
    firewall.open_proto.ftp | default = true,
    firewall.open_ports = []
        @ (if firewall.open_proto.ftp then [21] else [])
	@ (if firewall.open_proto.http then [80] else [])
	@ (if firewall.open_proto.https then [443] else []),
} in // security => {firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443]
security & {firewall.open_proto.ftp = false} // => {firewall.open_ports = [80, 443]
```

> We then see that depending fields are updated when you overwrite the fields they

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We then see that dependent fields are updated when you overwrite the fields they
```

	@ (if firewall.open_proto.https then [443] else []),
} in // security => {firewall.open_ports = [21, 80, 443]
security & {firewall.open_proto.ftp = false} // => {firewall.open_ports = [80, 443]
```

Above, you can notice that, if accessing `security.firewall.open_ports` before
the merge, it will have a value. After the merge, this value is actuated.
As said before, dependent fields are updated when you overwrite the fields they
depend on.

In the Mixins part, we used a function field. It give the same here. We used simple
depend field for clarity but both behave the same.

## A word about contracts

When merging two records, all contracts of both left and right one
are applied to the resulting one.
For instance:

```text
let Port | doc "A contract for a port number"
  = contracts.from_predicate (fun value =>
  builtins.is_num value &&
  value % 1 == 0 &&
  value >= 0 &&
  value <= 65535) in
let Gt | doc "Contract greater than" = fun x =>
contracts.from_predicate(fun value =>
value > x) in
{
    port | #(Gt 1024) | default = 8080,
} & {
    port | #Port = 80,
} // blame because 80 < 1024
```

In the case the second record would contains `port=8888` it does not have blame.

TODO:

> - case of top level contracts,

Author: When the contract is attached to the full record:

```text
let x = {a = 1} | SomeContract in
let y = {b = 2} | SomeOthers in
x & y
```

If I'm not mistaking, contracts are simply merged no?

> - case of top level contracts,

Reviewer 3: Merging contracts is not well defined in the general case (`SomeContract` and `SomeOthers` could very well be custom contracts defined as functions, for example). So no, contracts are not merged. In fact, merging doesn't know if it is "at top-level" or not, so the semantics has to be the same for recursive merging of fields and for "top-level" merges, like merging two variables.

attribute sets in Nix). Merging is a fundamental built-in operation whose role
is to combine records togethers. It is useful to compose small and logical
blocks into a potentially complex final configuration, making it more
manageable. Merge is performed by the `&` operator.

Merge is a **symmetric** operation (or, pedantically, commutative). In practice,
this means that order doesn't matter, and `left & right` is the same thing as
`right & left`. When the operands need to be distinguished, as we will see for
default values for example, the idea is to use metadata to do so (annotations),
rather than relying on the left or right position.

**Warning**: At the time of writing, Nickel's version is 0.1. Important
additions to merging are planned for coming versions, including priorities and
custom merge functions. They are not detailed here yet. For more details, see
the associated technical document [RFC001][rfc001].

The section describes the behavior and use-cases of merge, by considering the
following situations:

- Merging two records without common fields
- Merging records with common fields
- Merging records with metadata
  * Default values
  * Contracts
  * Documentation

> - Recursive overriding

Reviewer 4: Could these link to the relevant sections (and maybe make it more explicit that it’s a toc, I didn’t notice it at first)?

## Simple merge (no common fields)

Merging two records with no common fields results in a record with the fields
from both operands. That is, `{foo = 1, bar = "bar"} & {baz =false}` evaluates
to `{foo = 1, bar = "bar", baz = false}`.

### Specification

Technically, if we write the left operand as:

```

> letf = {

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
left = {
```

(there’s a couple extra instances of `left`, probably because of copy-pasting. You might want to `s/letf/left` directly)

overridable through merging. For example, `{foo | default = 1} & {foo = 2}`
evaluates to `{foo = 2}`. Without the default value, this merge would have
failed with a `non mergeable fields` error, because merging being symmetric, it
doesn't know how to combine `1` and `2` in a generic and meaningful way.

### Specification

We can consider the merging system to feature priorities. To each field
definition `foo = val` is associated a priority `p(val)`. When merging two
common fields `value_left` and `value_right`, then the results is either the one
with the highest priority (that overrides the other), or the two are tentatively
recursively merged, if the priorities are the same. Without loss of generality,
we consider the simple case of two records with only one field, which is the
same on both side:

```
{common = left} & {common = right}
= {
  common = left          if p(left) > p(right)
           right         if p(left) < p(right)
           left & right  if p(left) = p(right)
}
```

Currently, there are only two priorities, `normal` (by default, when nothing is
specified) and the `default` one, with `default < normal`. We plan to add more

> in the future (see [RFC001][rfc001]).

Reviewer 4: Might be nicer to directly link to the relevant section

```suggestion
in the future (see [RFC001](https://github.com/tweag/nickel/blob/c21cf280dc610821fceed4c2caafedb60ce7177c/rfcs/001-overriding.md#priorities)).
```

note:
   ┌─ repl-input-1:13:12
   │
13 │     port | GreaterThan 1024
   │            ^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^ bound here
```

## Documentation

Documentation is attached via the `doc` keyword. Documentation is propagated
during merging. For example, querying `foo` by using the command `nickel -f
config.ncl query foo` on:

```nickel
// config.ncl
{
  foo | doc "Some documentation"
      | = {}
} & {
  foo.field = null,
}
```

Will print `"Some documentation"` as expected. If both sides have documentation, the behavior
is unspecified, as merging two distinct blobs of text doesn't always make sense
in general. Currently, Nickel will randomly keeps one of the two in practice.

## Recursive overriding

We've seen in the section on default values that they are useful to override
(update) a single field with a different value. The combo of merging and default
values can do more. In Nickel, records are recursive by default, in order to
express easily dependencies between the different fields of the configuration.
Concretely, you can refer to other fields of a record from within this record:

```nickel
let base_config = {
  version | default = "20.09",

>   input.url | default = url = "nixpkgs/nixos-%{version}",

Reviewer 4: Is that really syntactically correct?

Reviewer 3: Nope, it's inconsistent consecutive editions, good catch.

    ip_addr = "0.0.0.0",
}

// file: firewall.ncl
{
    enable_firewall = true,
    open_ports = [23, 80, 443],
}

// file: network.ncl
let server = import "server.ncl" in
let firewall = import "firewall.ncl" in
server & firewall
```

This gives:

```nickel
{
    host_name = "example",
    host = "example.org",
    ip_addr = "0.0.0.0",
    enable_firewall = true,
    open_ports = [23, 80, 443],
}
```

#### Extension

Given a configuration, you can use merge to add new fields:

```nickel
// file: safe-network.ncl
let base = import "network.ncl" in
base & {use_iptables = true}
```

## Recursive merge (with common fields)

When the two operands have fields in common, those fields are recursively
merged. For example:

```nickel
{
  top_left = 1,
  common = {left = "left"}}
& {
  top_right = 2,
  common = {right = "right"}
}
```

Evaluates to the record

```nickel
{
  top_left = 1,
  top_right = 2,
  common = {left = "left", right = "right"}
}
```

When one or both of the common fields are not records, the merge will fail
unless one of the following condition hold:

- They are both of a primitive data type `Num`, `Bool`, `Enum`, or they are null, and they are equal

> - They are physically equal, meaning that they point to the same location in

Reviewer 3: To be clear, this pointer equality stuff is not implemented yet (but very soon). On one side, I can see why relying on this may be fragile on the user side. It means that `{x = ["foo"]} & {x = ["foo"]}` doesn't merge, but `let y = ["foo"] in {x = y} & {x = y}` does. On the other hand, I guess as long as you under approximate real equality, it's still better than rejecting everything. In particular in Nickel, where I had problems when applying the same contract several times because any default value that is not primitive (a list, a function, etc.) wouldn't merge with itself). Also it probably helps performance because you just shortcut merging big records if they are actually the same.

But @edolstra may have a point: maybe what we want is to do it nevertheless, to make multiple contract application to never fail, but not document it in the specification, to avoid having people relying on this, and pretending that only equal primitive values can merge.

> - They are physically equal, meaning that they point to the same location in

Reviewer 5: > It means that `{x = ["foo"]} & {x = ["foo"]}` doesn't merge, but `let y = ["foo"] in {x = y} & {x = y}` does.

Oh, yeah that actually sounds pretty bad, breaking referential transparency..

> - They are physically equal, meaning that they point to the same location in

Reviewer 3: So, I just tried to implement this, and recursive records/revertible thunks make the thing even more tricky (in that it doesn't short-cut even when sub-element of the record are the same, which was my original motivation). So let us just get rid of that for now totally, both in the documentation and in the implementation :slightly_smiling_face:

  },
  server = {
    host = {
      "options": "TLS"
    }
  }
}
```

### Contracts

*Note*: see the [correctness section](./correctness.md) and the
[contracts section](./contracts.md) for a thorough introduction to contracts in
Nickel.

Fields may have contracts attached, either directly, as in `{foo | Num = 1}`, or
propagated from an annotation higher up, as in `{foo = 1} | {foo | Num}`. In
both cases, `foo` must satisfy the contract `Num`. What happens if the value of
`foo` is altered in a subsequent merge? For example:

- Should `{foo | default | Num = 1} & {foo = "bar"}` succeed, although `foo`
  would be a string in the final result?
- Should `{foo.subfield | Str = "a"} & {foo.other_subfield = 1}`
  succeed, although a closed contract `{subfield | Str}` is attached to `foo`,
  and the final result would have an additional field `other_subfield` ?

Nickel chooses to answer **no** to both. In general, when a contract is attached
to a field `foo`, merging ensures that whatever is this field merged with,
including being dropped in favor of another value, the final value for `foo` has
to respect the contract as well or the evaluation will fail accordingly.

#### Specification

> For two operands with one field each, which the same on both side, with respective

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For two operands with one field each, which is the same on both side, with respective
```

in general. Currently, Nickel will randomly keeps one of the two in practice.

## Recursive overriding

We've seen in the section on default values that they are useful to override
(update) a single field with a different value. The combo of merging and default
values can do more. In Nickel, records are recursive by default, in order to
express easily dependencies between the different fields of the configuration.
Concretely, you can refer to other fields of a record from within this record:

```nickel
let base_config = {
  version | default = "20.09",
  input.url | default = "nixpkgs/nixos-%{version}",
} in
base_config
```

Here, we referred to `version` from the `input` field transparently. This
configuration evaluates to:

```nickel
{
  version = "20.09",
  input = {url = "nixpkgs/nixos-20.09"},
}
```

Merging handles overriding on recursive record too. More precisely, when we
override the default value of `version`, *the fields that depend on `version` --
here, `input` -- will also be updated automatically*. For example, `base_config
& {version = "unstable"}` will evaluate to:

```nickel
{
  version = "unstable",
  input = {url = "nixpkgs/nixos-unstable"},
}
```

> Currently, one can only use it on a field that have been marked as default. A

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Currently, one can only override a field that has been marked as default beforehand. A
```
